Part 1: Architecture of the Revolution
Denigrating descriptors

Truman frames this as an attempt at some balanced assessment, but it is obvious he has certain out of scope beliefs (E.g. gay bad) that aren't explicit, but are very obvious from his framing, making it very painful to read if you don't share those beliefs. To this end, I'll list all the denigrating terms I can that go through it, and play them back to show what it feels like.


p19
“Incoherent gibberish” - how his grandfather would supposedly have thought of the phrase “I am a man trapped in a woman's body”.

As far as I’ve noticed so far, Trueman doesn’t really give a definition of transgender besides this. Please watch https://youtu.be/szf4hzQ5ztg?si=bZm1C6zzsHlOwq6K
(Forrest Valkai, Sex and Sensibility)

“Swagger” - advocates of critical postmodern philosophers swagger along the corridors of our most hallowed centers of learning.

p20
“Transgenderism” is accepted to be felt as perjorative by trans people, but Carl is using it anyway to point to underlying philosophical assumptions, and make up for the LGBTQ+ theorists use of “cisgenderism”.

p25
“Cultural pathologies” - “Acceptance of gay marriage and transgenderism are simply the latest outworking, the most recent symptoms, of deep and long-established cultural pathologies.” This one comes up a lot. I haven't seen “cultural pathology” defined yet either - not justified for that matter. What is bad for culture, and why, I would like to know?

p82 
“...the malaise of modernity…”, same idea as above I assume, but no definition given.

p28
“The New Left” is thrown around without definition- not pejorative necessarily but I'd like to know if it is a well defined term or more akin to “cultural Marxism”.

p36
Michael Foucalt (whom we have so far not had explained at all) has “rebarbative jargon and arcane concepts” as well as “myriad epigones and incomprehensible imitators”. This a mere 3 paragraphs after Truman's noble ideal to “first explain an action, an idea, or an event in context. Only when that hard work has been done can the teacher move to any kind of critique… I have therefore tried to be as careful and dispassionate as possible.” Granted, Foucalt doesn't seem to be his focus - but if this is a pattern, it is very problematic, because it teaches readers to disdain without understanding, thus acting to prevent readers from leaving their intellectual/cultural bubble.
Similarly, p86-87 “in order to justify the leisurely indulgences of their club of smug Cambridge elite”.

p52
“... certain sexual taboos remain in place, pedophilia being perhaps the most obvious… not all behaviours that bring about a sense of happiness for the agent, are regarded as legitimate”. This is a repeated theme in the book - “if they're okay with gay, why not with raping children?”. And it's a frankly horrific argument. Is it not obvious to you that pedophilia causes significant harm relative to homosexuality? Is it not obvious to you that the problem with pedophilia is that one of the agents is not ‘choosing a behaviour that brings inner psychological happiness’? If not we can look at plenty of survivor's testimony.
p63-64 fleshes this out more. Truman claims that our modern social imaginary “prioritizes victimhood” (I hope he justifies this claim later, so far he's given no evidence). He continues - “Pedophiles, for example, are currently unpersuasive as a victimized class, given the fact they appear more as victimizers… Gay men, however, as consenting adults, are not seen as victimizers…”. Like - yeah, duh. They “appear more as victimizers” because they are? Is that really not a philosophical sound distinction?

p56
Same sentiment as above “no cake baked is being sued for refusing to bake cakes that glorify the Ku Klux Klan”. Yeah he really said that.



1900s (Oversimplified) America Centric
There is an underlying feeling that anything that was the norm in America before the Reagan allowed no fault divorce, is “Western Culture”, and in some sense provides a coherent, Christian worldview. It is acknowledged that there were bad beliefs and practices back then too - but it is less acknowledged that the West is a very broad self contradictory set of philosophy and practices too.

p21
“The use of pornography no longer carries the connotations of shame and social stigma it once did”
Nude art from Greece through to Michaelangelo? And not only nude, but erotic art existed for a long time.
Strip teases?

p47
Another hypothetical scenario of Carl’s grandfather - here being asked if he was satisfied in his work and not understanding the question. Can we go further than anecdote? Maybe those old ABC (Australia) interviews? Or maybe even a historical analysis already done?
But besides, actually, for Truman to claim this implies that the definition of ‘satisfied’ has changed, and that nothing with the same definition as the present one existed in ordinary society in the relatively recent past - is that really defensible?

p48
“The ancient Athenian was committed to the assembly, the medieval Christian to his church, and the twentieth-century factory worker to his trade union and working man’s club.”
What about other people in these time periods who rejected community? E.g. monks?
What about other people today who embrace community? E.g. sporting teams, workers?
It’s kinda funny to miss community in trade unions after conservatives gutted them (source?).

p48
“Not to be exposed to ideas that may challenge their deepest beliefs and commitments (part of what was traditionally considered to be the role of education)” - since when was the role of education to promote atheism? Or was Christianity not the traditional deepest belief and commitment in the west until recently?
Side note, look more into the intended purpose of safe spaces, this smells like a misunderstanding.

p51
“If two men have a secual relationship in the privacy of their bedroom, my disagreement with such behaviour neither picks their pockets nor breaks their legs” - well this seems pretty idealised, insert examples of historical abuse/criminalisation, modern examples of calling for murder, etc.
p687-69 fleshes this out a little. Truman compares the modern calls for not just tolerance but recognition of LGBTQ+ people to the supreme court's ruling to ban racial school segregation because: “”To separate [African American children] from others of similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds is a way unlikely ever to be undone.”” According to Truman this shows the supreme Court is operating in a culture in which there is a newly psychological view of self. (Side note, I'd point to a parable or two about despising the poor and probably some Jane Austen to imply that maybe psychological harm was acknowledged in the past too).
In the same way “decriminalising behaviour… would certainly mean that homosexual acts were tolerated by society” (I'm still not so sure) - but recognition by society is demanded, and requires more than just not being imprisoned.

p55
“To use pejorative racial or sexual epithets ceases to be a trivial matter”.
At some point later in the book Truman talks about how in the past “Expletive redacted” would have caused shock - well, which is it?
p89, in contrast to rude jokes being reserved to weddings in the past “But in the third world, crudity becomes the norm because the general interdict against such is seen as a tyrannical hangover from an outdated way of viewing the world.”
Besides which, I suspect you could make a strong argument that such epithets were never a trivial matter - rather, the people they were directed at didn't matter. And that's why we are so disgusted with them now.
Besides, I suspect there's always been a strong correlation between calling someone a “&$@@ and causing them property or physical damage.

p76-77, quotes Rieff deathworks about how no culture has survived without a “sacred order”. 
No culture has survived full stop - they evolve. I'd suspect that removing the sacred order instead makes them evolve faster.
If you think removing the social order will not just change culture (which happens anyway) but destroy it entirely, what about Scandinavian countries?
Casual conservatism
Truman frequently drops in asides that aren't assessed or supported as they aren't the main point, but function to normalise a certain set of political and ethical views (broadly conservative ish, though of course a particular label isn't going to get all of them). Again, I'm worried this (together with a pattern of this sort of thing happening in churches and schools and youth groups and…) can function to give the audience an unassessed confidence and comfortability in sharing these views.

p40-41
“More controversially, the recent development of genetics has allowed for the production of foods that are immune to certain conditions or parasites”

p60
Regarding teams picked in school sport “One imagines that this experience is somewhat different from that of, say, a Jack Russell Terrier whose master comes home after work and calls him to sit on his lap. The Jack Russell may well be thrilled by the return of his master and by the fact that he has been acknowledged or recognised in such a way, but unlike the child picked for the playground team, he will lack the self-consciousness to reflect on the fact that he has been so acknowledged”. This may well be a true scenario, but I don't know whether there's any actual evidence one way or the other for whether canines can self-reflect.

p69
“Yet the civil rights movement of the 1950s and the sexual identity rights movement of the present day… rest on antithetical premises, the former grounded in a notion of dignity based on universal human nature, the latter on the sovereign right of individual self-determination”. There's an implication that “gay and trans are unnatural and/or just a choice” here, which I believe is more openly stated in later chapters, but I haven't seen defended. Insert Forrest Valkali for some arguments that they are, in fact, part of universal human nature.

What's the point
I'd like to understand and assess what this book is primarily trying to argue, because from first glance it seems very broad.

p29
“My task here is limited: to demonstrate how many of the ideas now informing both the conscious thinking and the instinctive intuitions of Western men and women have deep historical roots and a coherent genealogy that helps explain why society thinks and behaves the way it does.”

Hmm. Now the complexity here is that Truman explicitly isn't showing “how” this happened, just “that” it did happen. In practice, so far I'm worried he won't try to prove a causation or other connection - just point at a past philosopher, say “hey, they can be interpreted as saying something about trans people”, and assume that thus they have deeply impacted societies attitudes to trans people.

p48
An outline of “how this came to be” appears to be:
In the religious world of the middle ages, commitment to the community was more important than and prior to the individual - so therapy was collective, not individual;
This requires the belief that the community is good for individuals (does it - doesn’t that make the position ultimately about the individual anyway, just arguing about means not ends?)
Jean-Jacques Rousseau challenged this by regarding the community as a hindrance to the individual.
The romantics, Freud and Rieff followed up on this via Marquis de Sade, as did Marx, Nietzsche, Reich and Marcuse, ending up with the community as not merely a hindrance but an oppressor, specifically sexually so.

p78-79 provides a calm and reasonable outline of the justification for abortion given the absence of divine knowledge of the personhood of embryos. One would hope a similar assessment might be given for homosexuality or against pedophilia?
However there is a concerning line: “”Will this make me happy? How can I attenuate the risks? Does it harm someone else's psychological well-being?”... because these measures are always changing and are frequently subjective, they provide no stable framework for ethics”. This is a huge claim - can the basis of ethics not be complex? I mean, should I not play baseball because under some conditions swinging a baseball bat would cause harm? No, that's a ridiculous argument. It's clearly fine to have conditional ethics based on the effect actions haveon people. If other people's minds exist, the effect on them should surely be considered. Even if it is a little more difficult to assess psychological impact, that's a pragmatic implementation-question not a foundational one.

First, second and third worlds
p74-82 define from Rieff:
first world culture = appeals to transcendent myths for moral codes, e.g. oracle of delphi.
second world culture = appeals to faith in a transcendent (deity? order?) for moral codes, e.g. the will of God revealed in the bible.
third world culture = doesn’t appeal to anything transcendent for moral codes, but rather to itself, e.g. consequentialist pragmatic morality
Truman goes on to claim that this results in moral instability and volatility - unlike in the past, where first and second cultures could discuss morality on the basis of their transcendent sacred orders, third cultures don’t have such a basis to discuss morality.

But (and Truman acknowledges this himself) there was plenty of bloodshed in the past over incompatible foundations for morality, were there not? Catholics and Protestants, Sunni and Shia, Muslims and Hindus… I don’t know if it’s really defensible that having different transcendent foundations is any better than having none. Given that people do have radically different foundations, it seems like the only solution is to either establish a theonomy based on the dominant one, or find means to agree without referring to the foundations. I’d rather go with the latter - and doesn’t that mean you don’t need to found society on a foundation?

Carl seems to paint a picture of third world citizens as unable to engage in moral discussion: “there is no common ground on which the denizens of third worlds can engage in meaningful dialogue with those of the first or second. They acknowledge no transcendent authority by which morals and behavior can be justified or judged. More than that, third worlds are characterized by total opposition to any kind of sacred order…” (p80). I’m yet to meet someone whose atheism means amorality - nor even lack of basic moral principles. Sure, they aren’t founded on a belief in a deity, but I usually find that makes it easier to discuss morality, because they can’t appeal to “God says so” and axiomise things that I find objectionable - they have to tie them to their moral system more holistically.

To take the specific example given, abortion - clearly, even with a pretty well defined foundation, there is room for radical disagreement. How is having foundationless atheists any different to having a mix of Jews, Hindus, Buddhists, and Christians, all of which are in the second world and all of which have different second world foundations for beliefs about fetuses?

Emotivism and teleology
p82-88 outlines MacIntrye’s contrast between the robust philosophy of Aristotelian Teleology and the weak philosophy of Emotivism (mostly taken from After Virtue). Looking through the wikipedia page for the book was helpful and makes MacIntyre's argument look a bit more subtle. The less subtle version is that since Nietzche, we’ve lost the sense of “what one ought to be” as distinct from “what one is” - and with it, a transcendent meaning of morality - we’ve replaced it with emotivism, which “good” and “bad” are just stand-ins for “I like” and “I hate”. Without meaningful shared agreement on telos, a community can’t have meaningful moral discussion.

Again, I’d argue that as long as there is agreement on some significant premises, it doesn’t have to be that foundational.


Random funny stuff
p31 what the heck is a prolegomenon?
A: “a critical or discursive introduction to a book.”

p46, footnote 13: was dancing really that non-sexual and communal in the past? Is it really that sexual and individual now? 

Misquotes and Misunderstandings
p49 want to check this myself, but from crash course psychology I though the idea of “forming by performing” was more a descriptor to help understand all existing behavior in societies, and less a descriptor of the modern change in societies. Of course, Yuval Levin may be speaking of something different or disagreeing.

Forget what page, at some point talks about how the definition of marriage didn't change with homosexual marriage, but with no fault divorce. But was state marriage really in line with ”Christian marriage” until then? Should state marriage be in line with Christian marriage, even from a Christian perspective?

Part 2

p127
“There are other implications of Rousseau's thought that have clear affinities with the pathologies of our own age. The idea of the innate innocence of the hypothetical state of nature presses towards a cult of childhood and youth. Whereas in a society based on, say, Confucian ideals, age is to be respected because age brings with it wisdom” - is that even a thing in Confucianism? - “, the Western world of today generally credits youth with wisdom and sees old age as corrupt, myopic, or behind the times. For example, we have in recent years been treated to children and teenagers lecturing the older generation on everything from healthcare to the environment to matters such as Brexit and Donald Trump. Opining on each of these topics in any useful way actually requires some level of expertise and knowledge of the kind that only comes when significant time has been spent studying the subjects at hand and learning how the world works. But that has not stopped serious newspapers and pundits taking the voice of the youth seriously. Why? In part, it is surely because Rousseau's basic point about nature, society, and the authenticity of youthful innocence has become one of the unacknowledged assumptions of this present age. It is part of the social imaginary.”

Hoop boy there's a lot to unpack here.

Children Donald Trump environment




Interlude: Some other people's stuff

Phillip Jensen, “Trembling at his word in the heat of battle”
https://phillipjensen.com/resources/tremble-at-his-word-in-the-heat-of-battle/

« TP: Philosophical materialism was kind of the bedrock, opposing worldview that generated all kinds of things. One of them, of course, was a sexual revolution and a whole new way of thinking about men and women. How did that change our culture, and bring a new challenge to our churches? 
PJ: Well, again, it’s tied up with money and wealth. New technologies like birth control and electronic labour-saving devices (like washing machines) meant that the nature of family life changed radically. Women could go to work in ways that they couldn’t previously because of how households could now be run. 
That change was just huge. And once you started having two incomes in a family, then you had more intense competition for house prices. In a sense, feminism has created the housing problem of today, which is a very politically incorrect thing to say. But once everyone’s got two incomes, then one income can no longer afford to buy a house. So then everybody has to have two incomes to be able to afford to buy houses. And so house prices have gone up for no good reason at all. »

Leaving aside that this is so unjustified of a claim « no good reason at all » is quite a broad dismissal of a century of women’s rights, availability of birth control and washing machines.

Besides, I’d say half the population being able to rent is worth the other half of the population having a bit more competition to buy.

“PJ: We knew we could not continue just to take feminism on board because it is essentially anti-God. Feminism is an expression of human sinfulness. The whole analysis is completely non-Christian. It speaks of power imbalance, but that’s the language of Marxism not Christianity. Feminism doesn’t start with the biblical understanding of what is wrong with us—which is sin—it starts with an analysis of power relations and patriarchy. But it’s hard for Christians to believe the ‘all power corrupts’, because we worship the God of all power. And it’s hard for us to accept that patriarchy is inherently evil because our God is the great Father, from whom every fatherhood is named. We approach it quite differently, and that necessarily leads to a conflict of ideas. “

Okay, so for one, feminism as generally understood today predates Marxism - there is marxist feminism, but it is not the only branch, it is one of several.

For another thing, feminism per-se does not try to give an exhaustive analysis of the human condition - just because feminism doesn’t inherently talk about sin doesn’t mean it is incompatible with it.

And so on to the problems with feminism - an analysis of power relations and patriarchy. I feel it is very easy, and not at all problematic with feminism as I understand it, to add “human” in from of those words. “Human power relations” and “human patriarchy” have problems x, y, and z, and feminism seeks to rectify that. Then these objections are simply non-sensicle. Christians can we understand that human power corrupts, it is well evidenced throughout their own bible. Likewise Christians can examine the human patriarchy understanding that just because God is a father, doesn’t mean that everything humans do that looks like fatherhood is good.

“Once you embark on a line-drawing exercise like this, you have joined an ancient club called the Pharisees, because that’s how they dealt with the Word of God. The question is always “How far can I go, and still claim to be biblical?””

Interestingly, this is the opposite of how I was taught about the Pharisees. As I understood it, they added many many rules on top of the OTs already exhaustive list of rules, trying to avoid getting close to breaking the law.

“Graham Goldsworthy once said to us that just as liberal theology was climbing out of the bog of JEDP, the evangelicals were jumping in. (JEDP is an academic theory about the composition of the Torah; Ed. ) It’s the same thing today: just as the non-Christians are climbing out of the bog of the feminist sexual revolution, evangelicals are jumping in. Mary Harrington has written a book Feminism Against Progress. Louise Perry has written The Case Against Sexual Revolution. These women are atheists and quite opposed to Christianity, but they have been looking at what’s happened in the last 50-60 years. And they say that the worst thing that’s ever happened to women was the sexual revolution and feminism, both of which has caused untold damage. And both of them are now saying that what we’ve got to go back to is marriage–marriage between a man and a woman where you raise children and stay together.”

This is very cherry-picking-ish. I’m pretty confident I could name a dozen atheists women who still support feminism. In fact, in wikipedia article on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Case_Against_the_Sexual_Revolution all four viewpoints described in Reception believe that while Perry asks some good questions, her analysis and solution are flawed.

Harrington still calls herself a feminist, so that’s funny.

To talk more about this would require me to actually read the books, since Phillip’s synopsis is just “feminism bad” and looking at the books online it seems there is possibly more to them than that.

“But if you do abide by the word of God, and tremble at it, so that in your teaching you do nothing other than be held captive to the Word of God, then you will divide opinions and people. They don’t like the message, so they shoot the messenger. Get used to it.”

I feel it is this kind of thinking that is very dangerous when it becomes an excuse for ignoring criticism.

“And then the Bible study groups had become ‘cell groups’ (another Marxist word). These cell groups actually were built out of social philosophy on the dynamics of interpersonal relationships, and so there was no Bible in the Bible study groups. That’s why there were ‘cell groups’.”

I’m super confused by this. “Social philosophy on the dynamics of interpersonal relationships” - what?

“TP: It also brought you into conflict with the authorities of the university at various points. I remember one famous incident where some students wanted to start a Greek New Testament class, and you were put up as the proposed lecturer for it.
PJ: Yes, that was around 1978. At that time, everyone had to do ‘General Studies’. And they tried to be inclusive, so you could nominate what General Studies course you wanted to do. And so some students nominated that they wanted to learn New Testament Greek. They were told no, because there was no one on the campus who was a good teacher for it. So they nominated me. In those days, I was still doing postgraduate work, both at London University and Sydney University, and so I had the qualifications to do it. So I said yes. 
Well. If I’d said “I’m going to kill my mother” I couldn’t have gotten a much bigger reaction. For the whole year, the institution of the university went into overdrive to find reasons why I couldn’t do it. They had people teaching General Studies courses on the history of spoons and forks; they had people teaching who had no academic qualifications at all. But I could not be allowed to teach. 
They kept inventing new criteria which would rule me out, but I kept passing each one. It was a terrible fight. They brought me in front of all the General Study lecturers and cross-examined me. It was an awful two hours or so. And in the end, one man got off his chair, walked over and looked right in my face and yelled at me. He said, “I’d rather have Adolf Hitler teach the history of Jews than you teach New Testament Greek.”
Then they set up a subcommittee to investigate whether it’s possible to teach New Testament Greek, and they brought out a printed report saying that because I was biased, I couldn’t teach it. Finally, I spoke to one of the professors, who was a Marxist teaching on alienation. And I said, “Well, if you’re a Marxist and can teach on Marxism, why can’t I, as a Christian, teach New Testament Greek?”
And he said, “Because I’ve got tenure, and you haven’t?” Which is a very Marxist answer (I’ve got the power and you haven’t).”
I would really love a second source on this, because I couldn’t find anything else online.
“It was the best thing he could have said. It liberated. The scales from my eyes. Up to that point—I was about 30—I was committed to the educational system of our world. I thought going to university was important. I thought passing an exam was important. I thought getting qualifications was important. I thought that if you had the degrees and the qualification that you would gain a hearing. But when I saw that the whole Senate of the university was rattled by me, I realized that my university qualifications and degrees and learning were a ridiculous waste of time.”
Look - that feels like a radical and somewhat unwarranted jump.


Phillip Jensen, The mistakes of Phillip Jensen
http://thebriefing.com.au/2012/03/the-mistakes-of-phillip-jensen/
“I grew up in a very loving family, a very caring family, with a certain degree of naïve trust in the institutions of our society and our world. So I trusted the Anglican Church, I trusted the Sydney Morning Herald, I trusted the university and educational system. That was an incredibly misplaced trust. Those institutions were nothing like I imagined them to be. So I thought the university was a place of learning, open enquiry, genuine intellectual robust discussion, truth-seeking… and there are people like that in the university world. I’ve met them. But that’s not really what the university is about. I only discovered that when I tried to teach the Bible at the University of NSW. As long as I was marginalized, as long as I kept my head down and was out of the way, as long as I didn’t speak or draw a crowd, I was tolerated.
TP: But when you did?
PJ: But when I did I was pilloried and attacked and persecuted consistently.
TP: By the university authorities?
PJ: Sometimes it was the authority structure itself; sometimes it was just individuals within the system. The university is a complex community. Sometimes it was the student union, or sometimes the university newspaper. Sometimes it was the enrolment office. It was generally anti-Christian people in the system. But they never attacked you for preaching Christ as such. They attacked you for handing out a leaflet in the wrong place.
Each year there was another way in which people within the system at the university fought against me gathering Christians on the campus to hear the word of God. Every year there was conflict—over giving out water to students, over room bookings, over activities in Orientation Week, or over whatever it was this year. That was difficult. But it made me realise that the university was not a place of free and open debate and enquiry about the truth, but a political game that was played according to certain rules—and the rules were made and changed by those in power for their own purposes.
That was a very different world to the university I grew up imagining. But it was good for me, because I learnt. And so I lost my respect of universities.”

Equates being a place of learning with anyone should be able to publically preach there; equates people trying to stop you preaching publically with persecution (at least, that's the example he gives); ironically, plays the victim card and attacks those in power for making up the rules, a very cultural Marxist thing to do.

“I was raised on the 39 Articles and the Prayer Book of 1662, and on the idea that as a denomination we were constituted by law, and that we had all the safeguards of constitutional authority. But of course, that was a nonsense, because I discovered that the Anglican constitution was only ever used to hold back evangelicals from the work of the gospel. It didn’t hold back other people—you could believe the most outlandish heresy and wind up as an Anglican bishop leading a diocese. You could practice certain immoralities and still wind up in positions of power. But if you wanted to change a jot or tittle that might advance the cause of the gospel, you would find all kinds of people against you.”

Getting a vibe that Phillip thinks the point of rules should be to allow evangelical Christianity to evangelize.

“At one General Synod meeting, people stamped their feet and scraped their feet on the ground as I spoke—the kind of rudeness that you wouldn’t even expect from a non-Christian, but this was the General Synod of the Anglican Church of Australia.”
Getting the vibe that Phillip doesn't think very highly of people who disagree with him on religion.

“And finally, I would say: make sure you go to Moore College and be trained properly—trained so that you can keep learning, and growing in knowledge and understanding, and not be locked into a closed framework of mind.”
Hmm, is the focus on Moore college a bit suss or is that just me?


Phillip Jensen, “Seeger: The Seeker?”
https://phillipjensen.com/resources/seeger-the-seeker/

“His integrity was part of his attraction.
Unfortunately though, he supported the Party. We all make mistakes in life – his was to support Joseph Stalin. Eventually he was disillusioned, not with communism, but with Soviet communism… sadly for Pete Seeger and his colleagues, communism, like all humanistic atheism, assumes and uses this sense of justice but fails to provide a basis for it or understand Christianity’s intellectual basis for their morality. … in the gospel I was given a rational basis for the intuition of justice. For all humans created in God’s image know intuitively the justice of God. Justice, righteousness, mercy are the things the prophets of Israel appealed to, and we do not need revelation to recognize them. The Old Testament doesn't differentiate between the laws that are lighter or weightier – but Jesus’ contemporaries should have known the difference, for it is plain for all to see. The Pharisees did not see the obvious and Jesus rebuked them saying: “the weightier matters of the law: Justice and mercy and faithfulness. These you ought to have done” (Matthew 23:23).”

Claims communism/Marxism/the party bad but doesn't explain what the differences are or why they're bad; claims Christianity provides an intellectual basis for morality but doesn't outline it, instead just says we a have an intuitive, not intellectual, understanding of morality prior to Christianity.

Phillip, “Does religion cause wars?”
https://phillipjensen.com/resources/does-religion-cause-wars/

According to Oxford:
noun: religion
the belief in and worship of a superhuman power or powers, especially a God or gods.
"ideas about the relationship between science and religion"
Similar:
faith
belief
divinity
worship
creed
teaching
doctrine
theology
sect
cult
religious group
faith community
church
denomination
body
following
persuasion
affiliation
a particular system of faith and worship.
plural noun: religions
"the world's great religions"
a pursuit or interest followed with great devotion.
"consumerism is the new religion"

According to Phillip:

TP: Okay, what is religion?
PJ: Well, it’s a nonsense category in some ways, that has been created in the past few hundred years as Western empires came into contact with other groups and civilizations.
The problem is that ‘religion’ is very difficult to define. To define something, you’ve got to have some features that fit every example you want to put in that category. But what are those key characteristics?
You can’t say ‘Belief in God’ because many Buddhists don’t believe in any god—and do you want to exclude Buddhism from the category? What about Judaism? It’s less about what you believe and more about how you are. Likewise with Hinduism. Hindus believe in an extraordinary diversity of gods and beliefs, but it’s not any one of those beliefs that make them Hindu—it’s the fact that they’re Indian. For a Hindu, to be an Indian is to be a Hindu.
So there’s no definition of ‘religion’ that works. In the end, it just becomes a rude word used by people who do not like other people’s Christianity or spirituality or Islamic belief, or whatever it is. It’s a term of abuse.
So they say, “It’s really about communities of faith, and seeking peace”—but not all religions are about ‘faith’, and not all religions seek peace.
In the end, the category of ‘religion’ is a convenient but nonsensical tool that secularists use to grapple with the non-secular view of the world.

TP: So we’ve got a category that’s almost impossible to define (‘religion’) being blamed for causing the incredibly complex multi-factorial phenomenon of war. It doesn’t sound like a very coherent accusation.

So yes, there are different non-identical definitions, and yes only some of them work in this hypothetical question - that you asked!?! Like, if you're going to attack a straw man, at least assign it to someone???

I also find it hilarious that religion is a nonsense insult used by - secularists? 

more
secular
/ˈsɛkjʊlə/

adjective
not connected with religious or spiritual matters.

Ironic

Phillip, Prove the Existence of God. The Eye (« l »?) of Atheism
https://phillipjensen.com/resources/prove-the-existence-of-god-the-eye-of-atheism/

“One of the attacks upon Christianity that is most commonly used by people is that of Atheism. Christians are often challenged in the High School classroom or arena of public debate to prove the existence of God.”

Look, I don't have any stats but that never happened in my high school. Lunch play area, sure, might have had that discussion, but it was definitely more questioning than an ‘attack’.

“The phrase ‘prove the existence of God’ is full of difficulties. The word ‘prove’ can mean ‘to demonstrate that belief is reasonable’ or it can mean ‘to demonstrate with absolute certainty’. That is, you can prove things in a Court of law and you can prove things in a mathematical exercise. But the nature of proof that is required in a Court of law is radically different to the nature of proof that is required in a mathematical exercise. Frequently, people put God in the category of mathematical exercise and demand proof of the same watertight, absolute accuracy. Such proof belongs to deductive systems of logic and is not available when discussing anything of the nature of existence.
Secondly, the word ‘God’ can cover a variety of different ideas. The creator of the world revealed in scripture as the triune Father, Son and Holy Spirit is in the mind of the Christian but not necessarily in the mind of the enquirer. Some years ago the Philosophy of Religion lecturer at one University defined God as ‘the basic God that all religions alike believed in – a God who was omniscient, omnipotent and benevolent’. Yet the God of Israel is very different to the God of Islam, especially in His benevolence. Furthermore, the Christian understanding of three persons in one God is quite different to the Jewish and Islamic understanding of Monotheism. Likewise, the deistic understanding of God is quite different to the Pantheistic or the Theistic view of God. The word needs much more careful definition before one can answer the challenge to prove God’s existence.
Finally, the word ‘existence’ is also ambiguous. ‘What does it mean to exist?’ is a difficult philosophical question. Frequently, in common language it means that he is there. However, it can also mean that he is part of the Universe or the world rather than outside it. We tend to think of existence as knowable through sensory perception. If that is the definition of existence then God may or may not exist for he may be outside of sensory perception.”

https://www.reddit.com/r/enoughpetersonspam/comments/y7gd3a/what_do_you_mean_by_youuu_dr_jordan_b_peterson_phd/ vibes, thankfully not taken as far but still this felt like a bit of a useless diversion? These questions are raised but not really answered?

“The Bible does not argue for the existence of God. Rather it affirms His presence. It speaks of his actions in creation and in redemption. It does show sensitivity to some people’s rejection of him. Thus some Psalms like 43 or 14 and books like Ecclesiastes discuss the practice of Atheism. Paul writing to the Romans (chapter 1) also discusses the rationale of people’s Atheism. However, the Bible perceives that throughout creation the knowledge of God is clearly revealed and that anybody’s denial of this knowledge is an ignoring of the facts rather than an ignorance of the facts.

The Bible does therefore, have an explanation of unbelief. It is called sin. Paul argues in Romans 1:18ff that people deny God, suppressing the truth that can be clearly seen because of their sinfulness. So he says of the Gentiles in Ephesians 2 that they are ‘without God’ (atheos) and ‘without hope in the world’. He is not saying that they are philosophical atheists but that they are living outside of any relationship with God. That is, once you reject God as God, you will tend to worship other things as God. Frequently, these other things are idols, creatures made in the image of animals and stars, etc. Thus the Atheist of Psalm 14 is one who wants to live immorally as if God is not there. The Bible does not see that unbelief is an intellectual problem but rather a moral and spiritual problem. The very notion of God is one that invades my place in the universe, challenging my own deity and authority to run my own life. Thus it cannot be met by neutral, intellectual enquiry but only by sinful self-interest.”

Sensitive to some people's rejection of him made me think we were going to talk about being gracious to non-Christians. Alas, we're going to call them evil liars instead.

What follows is three barebones evidences for God - too barebones to be contended with.

“creation… God’s existence can be and is induced from the existence and nature of what he has made, namely the whole universe.”

“the history of Israel… These people and their prophetic interpretation of the events of their nation are one of the most extraordinary cultures of the ancient world. They are one of the few cultures that have survived to this modern world. Even this is something foretold by their prophets. They were one of the first monotheistic groups in the world and have given rise to Islam, Christianity and Marxism which, combined with Judaism, now will cover the vast slice of humanity. They were unlike the other ancient powers in being fairly poor and militaristically weak. They gave a theological understanding of the world, which has developed a morality that lies at the basis of most justice systems in the world. If God was speaking to mankind few people could have greater claim to be the recipients of His message than these rather unusual people whom we know as Israel.”

We'll come back to morality. Prophecy is sketchy; foretelling your culture will survive isn't very specific or high stakes, and also arguably it didn't; India and China are two very large old cultures that have their own religions.

“Jesus. He comes in specific fulfillment of many of the prophecies of the people of Israel. He combines strands of prophetic expectation that were quite original and unexpected. He claimed to fulfill prophecies that could only be fulfilled by God himself. He demonstrated his claims in the character of his life, his death and his resurrection. He does not use His miraculous power in order to demonstrate the supernatural, as the Bible never doubts the supernatural. Rather, he uses His power in the fulfillment of prophecy to interpret and explain the character of His plans for the world thus leaving behind the evidences of the supernatural.”

Well, then we have to get into historicity of the gospels, which I suspect we'd disagree pretty ardently on since Bart Ehrman, the Jesus Seminar, and any other non-Christian historian are evil liars.

“it is important to understand that rationality alone is not involved in the knowledge of God. For there is a mistaken idea that we come to our opinions from a completely neutral and rational understanding which may be true on matters of small moment and little concern but is not true of something as important as the existence of God. This must not be pushed so far as to make all human discussion and reasoning relativistic and useless.”
Phillip goes on to point out issues with Rational argument and empiricism and instead offers

“This brings us to the other method of knowledge, namely revelation. The argument of 1 Corinthians chapter 2 is that because of man’s sinfulness he does not know God and cannot know God except by receiving revelation. It is only as God reveals himself to you that you can come to know him. People who reject God’s revelation cannot then claim to know him. At first glance this seems a strange argument but upon reflection it is the way in which we come to know anybody. The way you come to know your father or mother has to do with them revealing themselves to you. Without this self-exposure, i.e. without the object of your study taking the initiative and showing you their very nature and self, it is impossible to come to know another person. Thus if God is personal, as the God of the Bible most clearly is, then the way to knowledge is by receiving revelation.”

At this point I think we have  “ pushed so far as to make all human discussion and reasoning relativistic and useless.” - at least in the area of religion. We’ve delegated reason and experience to at worst useless and at best secondary, and we’re relying on - revelation - but what is revelation, and how can we tell a revelation is legitimate? No answer is given here.

Phillip goes on to list some common arguments against God, says they are linked to ways of presenting the gospel, and says Christians should talk about Jesus rather than God to make the discussion more meaningful. However, « This discussion paper will run too long if we set out answers to each of the basic objections to the existence of God ». Fair enough.

For some reason, perhaps because he sees it as more fundamental, Phillip does pick one argument to address - « the argument from verifiability. It is the philosophical assumption of much modern western thinking that the logical positivists are right when they say that any statement that cannot be falsified, at least in principle, is meaningless. If a statement cannot be disproved in any way even theoretically, then it is not making any actual meaningful comment about the world. » Response : « However, the Christian claim is not beyond falsification. If Jesus is not raised from the dead then Christianity is false. That is, if the tomb of Jesus can be found with the bones of Jesus still within it then the resurrection is untrue, and the Christian God does not exist. Thus, Christianity is openly and publically falsifiable. Thus the statements about God made by Christians are meaningful. » I’m no expert in logical positivism, but I feel like this doesn’t count as falsifiability. Assuming Jesus wasn’t resurrected, how could we verify the tomb or bones were his?

Further, I feel like it’s not binary. Given a thing is false, how easy is it to falsify? The easier it is to falsify, the more confidence we can have in it if it isn’t falsified.

If the only way to prove Christianity false is to find the labelled tomb of Jesus and somehow verify that, that’s pretty hard to falsify. What if Jesus was in an unmarked grave? What if the disciples stole the body? What if we can’t tell what the inscription is for sure, or which bones are there? What if Jesus was an alien, a demon, a trickster God? There seem many many ways for Christianity to be true or false and for this test to not work - it’s kinda useless.

After talking about the unbiblicalness of deistic gods and gods of the gaps (and apologetical pitfalls thereof), we get a good insight into Phillips understanding of atheism:

« 
Finally, Christians need to be on the offensive in their defense of the Gospel. Atheism is very big in diagnosis and very poor in giving an alternative. The weakness of atheism as an alternative needs to be exposed with considerable vigour in our society.  Atheism is not only human but also inconsistent, immoral, irrational and infrequent. This is the “I” of Atheism, for the alternative to Theism is the belief in the “I”. »

So there’s a trick Phillip uses here - atheism is poor in giving an alternative because it’s just the absence of something - of course, in real life atheists have many and varied beliefs about alternatives, but the concept of « atheism » in a vacuum doesn’t provide an alternative because it’s just a broad category of people defined by « diagnosis ». 

« Atheism is inconsistent not only in its impossible logical position of claiming they know everything. Thus to know that something does not exist requires you to know everything. Thus to know that pink elephants do not exist requires you to know everything in the universe for if there is some area of ignorance there may be a pink elephant living there. Likewise to know that God does not exist requires you to know everything otherwise it is possible that God does exist in the area of your ignorance.  On these grounds most thinking atheists have given up the word and moved rather to agnostics. This is a more pathetically humble word for it pretends to acknowledge that it doesn’t know while at the same time in its heart of hearts it still claims to know that God isn’t there. »

Okay so firstly, no, to know something doesn’t exist does not require you to know everything - provided you thing whose existence in question is specific enough. Phillip himself have a situation earlier under which he would believe the *Christian God* specifically would not exist. Atheists happen to have similar situations for all the other Gods people talk about.

Secondly, there are surely things Phillip doesn’t believe exist, such as, well, pink elephants. You can, as Phillip mentions earlier, have reasons for believing things that aren’t ironclad mathematical proofs, but rather chains of plausible reasoning.

« 
It is this kind of doublethink that is normal in Atheism. Take for example the immorality of Atheism. If we are the rulers of the world we can make up whatever rules we wish to make up. »

So why does atheism imply we are the rulers of the world? I tend to see atheists believing that « rulers » is a dumb concept we should avoid - that individuals have rights. Just because Christians happen to (think that they) derive rights from God doesn’t mean that’s the only way to do so.

« The word ‘good’ will only mean what I like.  All moral discussion is in fact a veiled power discussion for ultimately right is might and might is right. Whether I kill people, burn people, bribe people, love people is all ultimately an irrelevance. »

The definition of morality is a very difficult question. But believing in the evangelical God doesn’t make the problem go away, it makes it worse - for of course, God does kill people, burn people and love people, and it is right not because of some external standard we can hold him to (what possible standard could justify creating sentient beings to torture them to glorify yourself), but because he is the powerful one.

«  Thus the moral argument of the Humanists is completely fallacious. The fallacy is known as the ‘naturalistic fallacy’. The fallacy says that because there is something we ought to do something. We cannot move from the ‘is’ to the ‘ought’. Because the world is, does not mean that we ought to do anything in particular. Yet all atheists call out for moral rightness. »
Yes, David Hume made some difficult questions to morality - and they apply t’to both atheists and Christianity! But atheists have tried to answer them, and in my opinion have done a better job than Christians.

« Even the existential atheists who acknowledge there is no morality still call upon us to be ‘authentic’. »

Something tells me an existianal philosopher would have a lot more to say about this. That’s the problem with this kind of 1000 word critique of the entirety of non-Christian belief, you are guaranteeing yourself to crush huge disparate belief systems into little boxes. And then you end up with a vague feeling of knowing existialism is part of « dumb atheist philosophy » without any justification for that belief.

« 
Or take the irrationality of atheism. Most atheists like to claim that they have come to their point of view because they are rational, reasonable people rather than emotional psychological cripples who believe in God. »
Sure some atheists are dicks and say this - not most of the ones I know though.

« And yet if the world is not created by a mind aiming to bring existence into being with a purpose then the whole idea of rationality itself is questionable. Why should we expect the world or ourselves to function on the basis of any rationality or reasonableness? »
This is a very interesting question discussed by (insert that American philosopher, and some thoughts on it)

« What is logic but the expression of the power group trying to control the masses without the use of arms? »
This is an entirely separate argument, I don’t know who makes it, and I don’t see how it applies to Christianity vs Atheism.

« The very mathematical orderliness of the universe is the great conundrum for modern physicists. Why is a random event so mathematically rational? »
Again an entirely separate argument, and not particularly helped by Christianity -if we don’t expect an arbitrary universe to be mathematically rational, why should an arbitrary God be mathematically rational? 

« Why do I expect or want human life to be so? »
Uh do we want human life to be mathematically rational ? I mean I like math but…

« Or again, take the infrequency of atheism. Most atheists speak as if the whole Western world has turned away from God. Even if this were true in terms of the Gallup polls, which it is not, the Western world is not the majority in this regard. In fact the belief in God has been one of the most resistant ideas to social and ideological pressure. Majority views are not necessarily right. But Atheists love to appeal to the argument of ‘most thinking people today …’. However, most thinking people today believe in God! »
Again, haven’t heard anyone say that and they’d be a dick if they put it that way.
And besides, conservative evangelical Christianity is a similar level of minority to atheism on the scope of history.

« Or take again, the inhumanity of atheism. »
Wait earlier atheism was human, was that a typo?

« For atheists love to point to Christian and or religious inhumanity in terms of the Crusades or Northern Ireland but the name of Atheism has a very poor track record in terms of Marcus Aurelius, or Adolph Hitler or Joseph Stalin, or Pol Pot, or Mao Tse Tung. »
These are five very different people;
Blaming the atrocities of the ones that were atheists on atheism feels a bit like blaming Nagasaki and Hiroshima on Christianity.
Hitler called himself a Christian and criticised atheism - this is the next level from a no true Scotsman. Sure, it was probably all for political gain but likely same with the atheists ???
Relative to the other atheists wasn’t Marcus Aurelius above average in terms of niceness (even perhaps called a protector of Christians???)? And do we have any idea whether he was an atheist (bizarre for the time) or a polytheist (far more common as a Roman)?
So yeah, openly atheist dictators have a bad track record, so do openly Christian dictators?


« Furthermore, Christians can be held accountable for their failure to live in accord with their God who speaks against brutality and murder but atheists are not denying their atheism when they murder, pillage or destroy. For to the atheist – ‘humanity’ is just part of the accidental natural order, no better no worse; no more important or no more insignificant than the seal, or the kangaroo, the Dodo or the cockroach. »
Again, we’re playing the trick where atheism becomes a big homogeneous ideology when it isn’t. There are many moral systems compatible with atheism, just as there are many moral systems compatible with theism. Under at least most of these systems, yes, we can hold atheists to account when they murder pillage or destroy.


« Professor Singer’s arguments for vegetarianism, which are based upon the moral judgement against specieism, shows the irrational, immoral and inhuman pits that atheism will sink into. For my use of other creatures is condemned by Professor Singer on moral grounds because I am as much an accident as they. Real belief in the accident theory of life would mean that there are no moral grounds to question any of my actions. The belief that I am no different to the witchetty grubs that I eat is a total devaluation of human life.
»
This is such a bizarrely specific end to the article. Peter Singer has very specific moral views which are not held by all (or even most I suspect ) atheists.
Moreover they don’t imply that you are no different to witchetty grubs. They imply that the capacity to think and feel is present in animals, and hence animals have rights. But humans have a much greater capacity to think and feel than Witchity grubs, so we have a larger set of rights corresponding to that.
It’s intuitive that dogs and grubs should be treated differently. Singer’s views are in some sense just extending that, and applying it to animals we ignore the feelings of because they’re tasty.
Further, if Phillip had wanted to give a fair assessment of Singer’s most influential work, he would have also, or even instead, have talked about https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Famine,_Affluence,_and_Morality, a strong argument for caring about people, all people, even when it is costly. Hardly an inhuman philosophy.

James Franklin, The Sydney Intellectual/Religious Scene, 1916-2016

https://web.maths.unsw.edu.au/~jim/sydneyscene.pdf


https://www.eternitynews.com.au/opinion/cultural-marxism-fact-or-fiction/
Very interesting article… toeing several lines. Has good references and cites precise people directly which is awesome.


https://www.redeemer.com/redeemer-report/article/the_bible_and_same_sex_relationships_a_review_article
Keller on homosexuality actually engaging with arguments at least.


https://jonnyrashid.substack.com/p/why-naming-tim-kellers-sexism-and


https://open.spotify.com/episode/46UlFP0z4XVc4bpA3t5AwK?si=mAmAXII_QRGkm5b5S_qyVA
CBS on 1 Cor 6 (and that is what some of you were)

Knowing ourselves can only truely happen once we know God according to John Calvin - the place we know God is as he speaks to us through these words of the Bible.

« We’re reading a letter that one of God’s authorised representatives wrote to a place called Corinth… »
« …They’re arguing, the courts aren’t the answer… There are times when the courts are necessary… but Christian brothers and sisters are uniquely qualified to judge disputes between Christian brothers and sisters… »
Around 5:30
« chapter 5 ended with Paul saying Christians shouldn’t judge those outside the church… chapter 5 describes what happens now -  we shouldn’t expect those who reject the Lord Jesus to follow his ways, even if that would be really good for them… when Christ returns, the whole world will be judged based on how they’ve responded to Christ and his revelation.. »

Around 21:15
« When you drive with your irresponsible mates your body is part of Christ, when you watch an R-rated movie your body is part of Christ, when you enter the nightclub your body is part of Christ, when you’re alone with your girlfriend your body is part of Christ »

« Or do you not know again, that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her… while it is wonderful in marriage (to join yourself to your spouse), to join yourself to someone that is not your spouse, it’s abhorrent. »
It’s uncomfortable to me that the reasoning against adultery is not the effect it has on anyone, but purity of Christ…

Although later, around 23:30
« How far can you go? Flee sexual immorality… sometimes this seems to be our attitude towards sexual immorality : how close can you go without crossing the line. But you invariably cross boundaries that are unhelpful, sinful - they hurt you and they hurt others - the bedroom is no place to play the how close can you get game. »
This is concerning?
« … don’t run away from people of the opposite sex… avoid things that cause arousal, or that seek to sexually arouse other people… this means different things for different people… are there things that are unhelpful for you, maybe it’s the beach or gym or dancing or going out or the pool… even the stuff that you wear, whether you’re a guy or a girl, that is gonna help others to not be aroused around you. If you’re in a relationship what boundaries will you set up - will you commit to never be alone in a private setting. I get that I sound conservative and outdated, but I’m okay with that because what God says is profoundly for our good, and we’ll look weird because God commands us to run away from sexual morality while the world around us wants to flee towards it…

Different sins affect our bodies in different ways, whether it’s getting drunk, greed eating too much food has an effect on you - heavy drinking and heavy drug use leave scars on your body.”



